[Image](https://robertolofaro.wordpress.com/wp-content/uploads/2025/10/20200731_DecretiMancanti.png)</center>
As I wrote in Italian few days ago: <i>"stanziato non vuol dire impegnato"</i>, i.e. you can define a budget line, but then, as written above in that quote <i><b>"shall be committed in the years 2021 and 2022"</b></i> would probably require something more than a mere listing of amounts, no timeline, and transferring to others the responsibility of defining details in due course.
<b>a structural perspective</b>
As I wrote above, my approach to any regulation or bit of compliance is to "decrypt", i.e. look at the boundaries, constraints, and degrees of freedom.
Reason? To assess potential organizational impacts, and their timeframe- as this was usually the way I learned, well before starting working, to read documents that arrived from Brussels and Strasbourg.
Of course, it was working first in the Army (compulsory service, but working on bureaucracy along with other more routine stuff), then on business uses of IT for management reporting, and finally decision support for managers and senior managers that contextualized what could be relevant in terms of organizational impacts across many industries.
Having had as first business experiences within a company automotive on the procurement side of reporting, and banking on the general ledger side was an additional bonus, as in both cases had to see what I liked more- systemically, but learn how systems are made of parts and, despite what many legislators seem to think, "systemic impacts" means that you cannot simply replace one part and avoid assessing potential impacts on other, supposedly unaffected, parts.
The wider the scope of your compliance, regulation, legislation, the more unexpected might the impacts be.
Nonetheless, "unexpected" does not imply "impossible to identify": it is just a matter of resources, efforts, skills, and, of course, the right mix of all of them, and your purposes.
If you want a "quick win" for electoral purposes, you can adopt the approach outlined in this old advertisement that routinely quote:[ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LIw-iSsGXLs](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LIw-iSsGXLs)
If you look on my CV, since the late 1980s I was working on two lines that are usually parallel: number crunching for decision-making, and cultural/organizational change and improvement (sometimes mixing), while at the start was on software development on large systems.
And across the decades, I tried to keep alive both lines (and I was lucky to receive missions on those lines).
Why? Because usually companies that demand both have a structure that is beyond that affordable by smaller companies, and therefore the joining point between the two elements happens well above the operational level, where you can have a systemic view on the business and its context, and therefore also impacts of any changes within the context.
Since the late 1980s, when first had to work on related activities, I always found interesting how the "mental timeframe" adopted by many organizations, whenever confronted with a compliance issue, was a "stopgap", not a strategic impact, as each new requirement was passed over to operational or staff resources that looked at their own perspective, not systemically.
Even technology, when required by compliance, might actually have a systemic impact, if you approach it systemically (if you want to read a storytelling across few hundred pages of a fictional compliance initiative, across seven "episodes", have a look at [#QuPlan](index.php?page=89), it can be read online for free).
As an example of how things can be done in a different way also from Italian public sector entities, in the early 2000s (2004-2006) was introduced a reporting requirement, so that not just banks, but also investment or funding entities (between others) had to provide monthly information within a separate area of the National Risk databank ("Centrale dei Rischi") that was associated with banking activities.
Now, I will skip details I wrote about in the past, but the concept could have been: well, let's produce a report (a stop-gap measure).
But then, the requirement was to have, banking-style, a single unique identifier for each "customer", no matter which division worked with the customer.
And, at the same time, there were data privacy needs (the Italian law 196/2003 contained already many of the elements that are now familiar elsewhere via GDPR, albeit back then, as well as now, few were really compliant).
Again, to minimize impacts, many would have simply created a "buffer" used only to produce such a report, a kind of gatekeeper that, when receiving data, would have "matched" each customer with a unique code.
A convergence of motivation and budget enabled to do something more proactive (I was PM/BA on a prior CRM requirements project, and formally Senior BA on this specific project, albeit covered all the "boring"/administrative sides of PM, that was instead assigned to a technical PM).
Results? A design that actually restructured the way "customer" data were managed, to comply both with the reporting requirement and data privacy, but enabling then, at a later stage, to potentially create a real CRM having already harmonized not just customer data, but also the lifecycle associated with those data (e.g. when and how data were created and associated with existing data with a "need to know" approach, and when and how data could be amended, removed, or a request to track down all the data associated with a specific customer could be identified and retrieved), with minimal impact on each of the systems.
The same, more recently, applied for other laws, e.g. one of the various versions of the Industry 4.0 laws provided funding, but the way you structured the technological content had impacts on how much you could depreciate vs. how much you spent (in Italy we had incentives to technological updates that extended up to 150% of the amount spent that could be depreciated [here (in Italian)](https://www.mise.gov.it/index.php/it/component/content/article?id=2036312:super-e-iper-ammortamento-per-favorire-lo-sviluppo-dell-industria-4-0)).
Now, it is almost ordinary for any CFO (or, for smaller companies, for any CEO) to consider such impacts when there is a compliance issue (e.g. when was introduced SOX, to talk about a non-Italian example, also Italian companies had a look at it, and not only those working with companies subjected to SOX: sometimes, companies "import" legislative impacts in Italy well before the Parliament considers that an issue).
Or when there are potential tax credits, incentives, etc.
It is less common, but should not be so, when, instead, a major legislative effort delivers changes that could actually change the context.
The [law 77/2020](legge77_index.php) in and by itself, if you consider its integration with the [decree 34/2020](decreto_index.php), stretches across hundreds of pages.
Therefore, in this article, I will discuss only "structural" elements, not the content of each article.
Online I shared anyway both the [text via a tag cloud](legge77_index.php) (with links to the full text of each individual article) and a "timeline" approach, similar to the one presented along with the "Recovery", i.e. [until when](legge77_timeframe.php) the impacts of each article, as expressed within the article itself (or the prior laws that it references).
Actually, in both cases posted online also a CSV file containing the word frequencies, that are part of the information used to build and present the "search by tag cloud" that you can see at the previous link.
As for each article (or group of articles): I plan to write something more in the future, whenever relevant, but I will use as a source the same material that you can see online at those links- so, if you have to deal with Italian issues and have more urgent needs to access, search for patterns, etc- you are welcome to use both the [webapp](legge77_index.php) and the [associated CSV dataset](https://www.kaggle.com/robertolofaro/l-772020-20200717-word-frequencies-timeframe) and [GitHub repository containing the full text of the law as of 2020-07-18](https://github.com/robertolofaro/decretorilancio).
And now, I would like to share my "structural" commentary.
Which will be quite short, to focus on clear and direct messages, to avoid any ambiguity.
<b>What you could have expected</b>
I know that the defense of many is what I could call "McLuhan Defense", i.e. "the medium is the message".
Or: instead of writing for the intended audience, many assemble a "communication omnibus", so that anybody can find anything and, of course, you can find something that enables you, the author, to say "here see this, it is what you we thought for you".
Well, I would prefer something that is consistent with the stated aim.
If the aim is to "restart" the country, to overcome the impacts of COVID-19, let's say that the Government Decree 34/2020 was such as "Jack-of-all-trades" released in a hurry in May (make you think to an old movie [Seven Days in May](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0058576/?ref_=nv_sr_srsg_0)), with hundred of hurriedly written articles spread across few hundred pages.
But then, there were a couple of months to monitor and fix, and produce something more "focused".
Instead, while turning into a potentially permanent fixture (a law), the degree of "Jack-of-all-trade"-ness was expanded.
<b><i>To summarize: the expectation was for something to fix 2020, the result was something that looks like a notebook for fixing the country without a clearly outlined plan.</i></b>
<b>A fly in the ointment</b>
If worked in business, you certainly heard of "scope creeping".
Some could consider the example that I gave above of a compliance request for a monthly report turned into building a customer referential as "scope creeping", but it was instead, in my view, strategic systemic thinking.
If you were introducing a permanent change, then it made sense to make it matter, to avoid tinkering around.
So, step a little back, look at the requirement and say: what does it mean? what does it imply? how could this be too narrow-minded or too broad-thinking? what would be the appropriate balance?
But, still, remembering the purpose: deliver in few months something that will be permanent without wrecking the overall system, and, actually, enhancing it.
Back to the law, you could have expected something similar, e.g. when, having discovered that, in the end, a medical school student that already completed studies and already did an internship and is studying for specialization, would just be delayed from entering the market if the purpose then was to add yet another multiple-choice test (I am oversimplifying, here).
So, while "fixing" for 2020, you could, within the same article, make the change permanent.
And you can find that within the law: some of the articles whose impacts I listed as [structural](legge77_timeframe.php) follow this line of thinking: do it once, do not just tinker.
But in many cases articles focused on the immediate need (the COVID-19 pandemic) then extend well beyond you would expect from a set of measures due to a temporary issue.
As an example: everybody knows that in a data-centric economy where soon we will all be 24/7 surrounded by sensor "poking" at us and collecting and maybe processing and broadcasting data the we (and the sensors that we will be carrying around with us) will provide, data privacy will be a key concern, as a founding element of what in the XXI century will be "freedom".
Now, it is understandable that somebody said "well, it could make sense to use health data and predictive systems to tune the allocation of resources for national health".
Albeit frankly changes such as this one, or those on the national health dossier of each citizen, would deserve a fully-fledged discussion in the Parliament to balance needs and impacts, not just a "placeholder" article that defer to others within the bureaucracy to decide how to make it work- transferring political choices (that should be adopted by the Parliament) to a bureaucracy that answers just to the Government.
The same applies to measures for innovative start-ups, with funding defined up to 2021, and from 2022, but with no limitation.
But, at least, these have focused articles that the Parliament could actually easily put into the debate of the forthcoming "streamlining" government decree- and strike-out if not politically acceptable.
More cumbersome instead is when a comma within an article focused on the emergency introduces something that is out of scope within the article, or creates a new organizational entity, or adds other structural changes (sometimes even with the statement "with no additional costs" for something that, in any organization, would imply additional costs, and sometimes providing budget only for kick-starting).
<b><i>To summarize: if you read at the preamble of the document from Brussels I discussed at the beginning of this article, the law 77/2020 is neither significant (in terms of resources- the scope creeping expands too much- "nozze con i fichi secchi"), nor focused (ditto), nor limited in time.</i></b>
<b>A collection of risks</b>
Well, the law 77/2020 is now here to stay- but can be amended later.
The point of this article, and the introduction built around the "Recovery" document is just to highlight some "habits" that frankly would make difficult not only to assess the impacts, but also to implement or adapt in any organization.
Moreover, from what are the routine critical remarks on what Italy presented in the past that I heard in Brussels while living there, this law is just a prime example of why we had in the past issues with accessing to EU funding.
Even more absurd- as, until now, we were a net contributor- so, not accessing our potential quota of funds was, for a country that has been sliding for two decades, even more quixotic: we were putting back in the pool resources after adding more resources than we received, not out of a lack of need or generosity, but simply... 
...structural inability to present something that would make sense and could be monitored.
And, despite that, we had more than our fair share of frauds- [look at the OLAF report 2018](https://ec.europa.eu/anti-fraud/sites/antifraud/files/olaf_report_2018_en.pdf)
The 68 pages of the document from Brussels frankly contain all that would be needed to define a "framework" of what should be in and out of each proposal, and probably also to structure the typical elements that you would expect.
Nothing of what I wrote above since the beginning of this article is impossible to improve.
Actually, outlining priorities, and then collecting contributions, instead of creating yet another task force or committee that answers only to itself, could be a worthwhile effort.
As the "Recovery" part of the funding is certainly important, albeit, personally, I think that there are three elements worth considering.
The first element is defining anyway a framework that makes sense across all the funding opportunities, considering that it is a string: the ESM/MES provides funding for the immediate health-system needs, "Recovery"/NGEU covers in parallel to MFF a "bridge" between the emergency and the structural reforms.
The second element is a timeline for intervention that is credible, considering how the Italian State really works- we cannot afford to get a "funding bandwagon" without controls- if you read the OLAF report I referred to above, there is one element that puzzles me: out of 23 cases notified to OLAF (page 57), none were reported by public authorities; yet, on another dimension (page 41), we had 21 cases outstanding at the national judicial authorities, while of the 23 decision taken, a 48% resulted in indictment; so, controls should be reinforced within the State on expenditure
The third element is trying to leverage on public and private resources: this is another element that is discussed here and there within the 68 pages, while in Italy the discussion you read is how to spend 209bln, not what those 209bln could enable.
I am just a citizen with some experience in number crunching on the business side (and a bit also on the public side) and introducing changes and improvements, so my impact is next to zero.
What I would like to see within the proposals is something that is: _built thinking about the audience: use the contacts in Brussels to define the framework_contains something that iscontextualized, with defined scope, aggregating competences from public and private sector, organically integrated with the real capabilities of Italy, with as clear a timeline as possible, measurable, and focused on convergence and moving forward.
As I posted on [Linkedin](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/robertolofaro_aiutare-una-ristrutturazione-activity-6694336359949209600-FmJz): something to foster a restructuring, not just to consume resources and keep afloat.
Have a nice week-end