<center>[Image](https://robertolofaro.wordpress.com/wp-content/uploads/2025/10/20210422_article.png)</center>
This post has a curious story.
It started actually long ago, as I was planning a follow-up to a couple of books that I published in the past [#BYOD, i.e. using your own devices also for business](https://robertolofaro.com/byod) and [#SYNSPEC, i.e. how to attract, develop, retain talent in our "liquid organizations" times](https://robertolofaro.com/synspec).
Underlying all that, of course, our society where gradually we are getting used to disclose data that are absolutely irrelevant to the purpose that they are being asked for.
Or, even worse, are relevant for the purpose, but only if used "illico et immediate"- instantaneously and then forgotten, and instead take another meaning if stored, piled up across time, and connected with data about other people, organizations, events, to generate "profiles".
Yes, on that too, as my first business experiences on data privacy where in the late 1980s on a banking general ledger project, published a book (and few articles)- a main selection is [my GDPR page](https://robertolofaro.com/gdpr), but you can also search under "privacy" or "gdpr" within my website robertolofaro.com
Now, I think that you write about something, your should have some "depth", i.e. you should know more than what you write (directly through study and experience, or indirectly by extracting experience from others).
Anyway, today, 2021-04-22, [I have two news items to share, from today's Italian newspapers](https://www.facebook.com/robertolofaro/posts/10157607117097016):1) the reported first step from Karlsruhe on the EU measures2) the release of the new draft of the Italian PNRR.
As I wrote in previous articles, in Italy we still refer to the "bundle" of #NextGenerationEU, measures toward resilience also in the new budget, and the 2% for health-related measures due to COVID19 (from the ESM, in Italian called MES) under the overall name "recovery plan".
Obviously, the first includes both the "recovery plan" and the plans for restructuring and improving EU Member States resilience and convergence (three balls in the air).
As for the latter... it is still a political contentious element.
Anyway, in this article, focused on a specific theme that is often forgotten but is unforgiving, fostering a corporate continuous learning culture, I will comment #NextGenerationEU and #PNRR only indirectly.
You can search this website for other articles specifically on the [former](search.php?tag=nextgenerationeu) and the [latter](search.php?tag=pnrr), while I shared in December 2020, within a book discussing few cases of Italian bureaucracy as case studies, also a chapter on both, that [you can read online](https://issuu.com/robertolofaro/docs/20201217_issuu_preview).
For this article, I decided to split it into few parts:- a shared introduction (the one you just read)- two parallel personal and business sides- a shared conclusion.
As represented in this "article roadmap":<center>[Image](https://robertolofaro.wordpress.com/wp-content/uploads/2025/10/20210422_urbanizationeu.png)<i>(source: [notebook on Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/embed/robertolofaro/eu-27-narrative-on-indicators-from-world-bank))</i></center>
Do you really think that all that can be undone in just one year?
Your products and services will have to consider the urban environment and its forthcoming evolutions, such as [the presence of "Edge" computing facilities](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edge_computing), i.e. bringing computing resources closer to where data are generated and consumed.
So continous organizational learning will not be limited to corporate continuous learning and its associated web of formal agreements, even extended to both supplier and customers (and, of course, internal resources).
Once you introduce further flexibility through transparency, and extend that across the whole product and service design, development, delivery chain, probably you will realize that interactions within the market, suppliers as well as customers and, why not, even competitors, all will have at least an element of that "generate/broadcast and receive/process".
Some companies might be tempted to simply ignore this evolution, and follow the old approach.
The risk is that this new set of capabilities, and more potentially more flexible and continuous re-arrangements of knowledge, will open a further round of disintermediations, similar to those introduced by Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple with their online and mobile services.
Since 2012, I attended in Italy various workshops, seminars, conferences about the future of business, integration of industry 4.0 elements (e.g. IoT, digital twin), and fintech.
Of course, until end 2019 were in person.
The interesting part in those in-person events was not just what was presented, but also how- the patterns of presentation, structuring of the narrative, etc- and the ensuing feed-back and reactions.
One element struck me back then: how many companies gradually evolved from industry-centric proprietary ecosystems, to cross-industry ecosystems- but still proprietary.
With the new data-based transparency across supply chains that was tested by some larger companies since the beginning of the COVID19 crisis, instead heard of more and more ecosystems started within an industry, and extending to other industries not through exchanges or connections, but through expansion of the products and services offering of the company that initiated that specific proprietary ecosystem.
As an example, earlier this week a Board Member of Audi in a webinar at the Nvidia GTC21 (a series of conferences presenting both what's new about Nvidia products and customer cases or presentation of potential future cases) quipped that if Google and Apple can enter the carmaking industry, then Audi can enter their market.
And others, in a different presentation (to discuss <a ref="https://www.adlittle.com/en/insights/report/future-automotive-mobility">a report on the future of automotive mobility</a>) talked of cars as if they were smarphones, and the key difference between the speeches of the different carmakers presenting was...
...the quantity of services that they will see as part of the future (for some, present) source of revenue- but, generally, convergence across this and other webinars on the industry was at 20-50% or more.
And they were not referring to the usual aftersales services (spare parts, etc.), but to data-oriented services, e.g. converting a moving autonomous driving vehicle into an entertainment platform-on-wheels, interacting with the environment it goes through.
So, imagine automaker X competing with Google on advertisement on vehicles through the on-board entertainment system.
Long ago, while I was in London, I remember supporting a colleague on a case study about a company that wanted to install computers on board on London taxis, to be used by customers.
Too early for the times.
As I quipped last week during a job interview, eventually cars too could become virtual bank branches.
And, why not, if, as I wrote long ago, 3D printers were to be distributed e.g. in urban centers, actually also logistics could change, at least for "standardized" and consumer products.
If you have just an ecosystem (your own) to monitor, you can probably rely on your own employees looking for signals of potential evolutions, new products, services, etc.
Instead, if you consider that your own products (not just cars) and customers, through interactions and exchanges of data, might actually continuously do for physical "smart" products what each user of smartphones or major social portal does everyday (help to identify potential new products or services), being there first could mean having a competitive advantage.
In this case, probably your own product delivered to a customer might be your own "antenna" on potentially useful interactions with other ecosystems.
I shared in 2018 an article on one issue with my birtplace: ["retaining structural ability to cope with #complexity in #Turin"](index.php?page=338).
When you have a complex system and streamline its complexity by scaling down, also if you pretend to retain the "knowledge supply chain" (R&amp;D, universities, labs, etc) that supported the previous level of complexity, gradually it decays- knowledge does not exist in a vacuum, and if you do not use it, at best you can limit its decay, but, anyway, it turns into something lacking the "deployability".
If, then, you are suddenly to resume the ability to cope with the old level of higher complexity, unfortunately the risk is that, for a while, a kind of "cognitive dissonance" settles in.
In Italy, I observed it routinely- and in the 1990s also foreign colleagues and contacts (from USA and other countries) that had worked in Italy even before I started working in 1986...
...generally all eventually remembered when somebody said "we used to have the Roman Empire" or something more recent but equally out-of-touch (e.g. the role of towns in Renaissance in Italy).
Now, if that "cognitive dissonance" worked with something that those talking had no real experience thereof, you can imagine when instead, organizationally, they had experience.
A typical example? Decades ago, while working in banking outsourcing, some organizational bank managers told me that, few years after starting working in "full outsourcing" (all the system out) saw that they had lost the business knowledge needed to evolve their own system needs.
The reason, that I saw also in other industries across the years?
When you outsource, or even just stop to use some knowledge, in most cases the most experienced (and often most expensive) people that worked on what has been outsourced are either fired, shuffled elsewhere, or simply not replaced when they retire.
So, the company loses a "business domain antenna" that knew how to blend domain expertise with the specific organizational culture, and assess the impact of any change (or, also, of any decay).
Therefore, it might be tempting, considering the new, forthcoming "open ecosystem" model, to cut down your costs- but beside the formal knowledge, you will lose also all that informal knowledge that could be your own competitive advantage for future evolutions.
Obviously, this is different for a new organization. 
Unfortunately, many of the companies "driving" the technological evolution have no experience of long-term knowledge continuity, and limited or no understanding of what this entails.
Look e.g. at how many products and services have been abandoned, simply with a short-term notice after enticing maybe major corporate customers to invest on those same technologies.
Now, the "data" side presents a different set of issues, apparently technical, but, frankly, easier to manage if you are used to a "marketplace" mindset.
<b><i>the data and technical impacts</i></b>
As often in my articles, "technical" means something more than just "related to technology".
When I write "technical", I mean- related to a specific domain or expertise, generally one that requires a long knowledge-transfer and "savoir fair development", not the usual half-a-day or one-week-and-you-are-certified approach.
During the Nvidia GTC21, and not just for the Omniverse, few repeated an issue: in many cases, it would make sense to aggregate data from multiple parties to generate more meaningful analyses, e.g. to remove bias in data (such as overrepresentation of a segment of the population).
The key constraint is that, if data have value, how do you share data to enable better analytics for everybody, but without disclosing data?
The concept is not trust on the content, but trust in readers and "channels" conveying the information from producers to readers.
As one of the panelist talking about the issue was from Italy, asked via Linkedin if they had considered using the Centrale dei Rischi (originally the central database on banking risk in Italy), as gradually the same approach had been extended from banks to other financial entities.
In my past consulting life, in the late 1990s, for the activity involving a UK-based company (the one I referred to previously in this article), we offered a solution on risk reporting and monitoring at the branch level.
During a negotiation with an Italian banking outsourcing company, I had to dig deeper into the Centrale dei Rischi functional specifications to be able to both deliver an English translation and map out the differences vs. the UK approach and its constraints, and discuss eventually, if the project were to be approved, the "convergence roadmap".
Now, the issue was similar to the one that I heard over the last few days: having competing parties contributing data to a shared datasource while avoiding that your competitors see your data.
The concept was solved as follows (to make it simpler, I will refer only to banks and streamline the concept and flow):1. each bank contributes with an agreed format and frequency data about its own customers, referenced by a unique identifier by customer2. the database can deliver the overall level of commitment for a customer, across all the banks reporting to the database3. each bank can see this aggregate, but only its own details4. to avoid "free riders", querying about somebody who isn't yet a customer implies a paying a fee.
There are further details (e.g. each bank might have multiple systems internally, but anyway, to send data and ask for information, each customer will have a unique identifier used in exchanges with the database).
I know- now many of my readers will started talking about blockchain etc.
But: this was long before, and blockchain has another purpose, while the key feature of this system was that Bank of Italy was trusted by all the contributing banks.
So, it was based on trust, centralized, and without data dissemination.
Now, move that toward "proprietary ecosystems": the same approach could still work, if the "manager" of the ecosystem will be a trusted third party.
Of course, if your ecosystem to be used for benchmarking etc instead requires all your suppliers to provide internal detailed information that is business confidential, and then stored along with that of their competitors that are also your suppliers (no large organization should ever single-source something critical)...
...the issue could be that suppliers would not be willing to share that level of information with you, if then you use the information as a negotiating tool to maybe involve a third supplier.
Asking data during a negotiation is fine, on those shortlisted (in the 1990s and early 2000s designed also Vendor Evaluation models in few domains).
Asking to provide continuously operational details would require having a third-party that is really independent and can ensure data segregation- also from yourself, to avoid conflicts of interests.
In a webinar on supply chain, a while ago heard a company that adopted a level of greater transparency across the whole supply chain, and then developed KPIs to better assess risks, but the way it was described was as a "proprietary" ecosystem, with a strong motivation for suppliers to be on board.
I wrote at the end of the previous sub-section that the new data "open ecosystem", if you want to be able to provide the value added that multiple contributors can provide, would benefit from a "marketplace" mindset.
The concept is: if your interest is to build a markeplace that enables a higher level of analytics that involves multiple sources, potentially usually competing with each other, you have to focus on the value added you create for your "customers".
Meaning: you should resist the temptation that some marketplace have, of having those managing it turn into "market makers".
Actually, in the late 1990s I said as much to one of the first online startups I supported (business and marketing planning): at least, build a "Chinese wall", i.e. structural separation.
If you are talking about a marketplace of, say, data collected across urban areas from vehicles from multiple suppliers, or companies and people moving around, and then try to use that information to influence the market, unless you start also to produce data that replace those data (not feasible with the concept I am referring to, i.e. every agent as both consumer and producer of data and analytics), it is just normal that, in a data-centric society where many have access to capabilities to "understand" what is going on, you will simply lose the sources.
And, as happened to other "marketplaces": not necessarily exchanging products or services outside the platform, also just excessive revenue-generation through "squeezing" membership and creating annoying advertisement or product placement could generate a flight toward other marketplaces.
<b>Using #NextGenerationEU to foster a new ecosystem</b>
Yes, these are the real conclusions.
Online, even before releasing my book that contained the chapter on [#NextGenerationEU and the Italian PNRR](https://issuu.com/robertolofaro/docs/20201217_issuu_preview) in December 2020, advocated as a way to counterbalance streamlining of bureaucracy in Italy to use one simple approach.
More data transparency.
I know that some in business in Italy complain that there is already in some cases too much transparency- up to the point where you have to disclose information that potentially could be of use to competitors in future activities.
But, frankly, we are a country where organized crime has a stake on the GDP in two digits- and nobody really know about their impact on assets, as both during the 2008 crisis and since 2020 routinely news of attempts to take over cash-based businesses reminded old stories.
Of course, in a liquidity crisis (which, frankly, I saw already in Italy in part well before 2008), cash-rich organized crime aims to extend its access to assets that could both generate revenue, and be a useful conduit for money laundering.
Few days ago was announced that some minimal data will be published about infrastructure projects that will start soon- a good start, but still not enough to enable across the country the level of public scrutiny the allowed streamlining the rules to be applied while rebuilding the bridge in Genoa.
The "nine islands" concept could be useful also on these issues: local as well as regional and national authorities in Italy have to work with a maze of rules and regulations, but still in most cases release few "open data", and way too late to enable any further commercial use (or even to be used to pre-empt organized crime infiltrations at the first signs) .
At least in the 20 Metropolitan Areas (Turin, Milan, Rome are three of them) that have an internal staff and bureaucracy large enough to cope with this kind of projects, would be interesting to have pilot "data centric projects" to create "edge" computing resources and both collect and broadcast data, or enable experimenting with the kind of multi-company analytics that some companies tried during the COVID19 crisis.
As an example, integrating sensors distributed also in businesses, and trying new proximity services.
I shared in the past other examples, but the concept is simple: it is not just a matter of technology, it is a matter of building organizational cultures.
If leading towns were also able to build and enable access to their own "data ecosystem" at the local level, they could test approaches that are relevant within the Italian legal context, and could then be reused by other smaller local authorities.
Incentive? An extension of other experiments that e.g. are already ongoing in mobility to increase attractiveness for foreign businesses.
The new version of the Italian PNRR ("Piano Nazionale Ripresa e resilienza) will gradually add more details.
Also, could be interesting to have already in place a data collection system able to do benchmarking and analytics following the guidelines described above, again to enable (this time, at the national level) a data culture that could benefit also the State (and its citizens) indirectly, by enabling analyses also from the private sector reusing public data on PNRR projects, and identifying potential new services or products.
Again: continuous organizational learning does not apply just to private companies, but also to local, regional, national authorities, and their interactions with companies and organized groups of citizens.
<b>Conclusions and thinking creatively about virtualization of personal work presence</b>
In reality... 
...it is up to you to derive your own conclusion and (hopefully) action plan.
Mine? Will be in future articles and within a forthcoming book...
... also if the title of this section is obviously a clear indication of a subject worth further thinking about.