Just a quick note...

So, at last I am preparing the last episode of the first series of [#QuPlan](quplan)

But, at the same time, I am moving forward with the drafting of the #Expo2015 book (not really on Expo2015, just an excuse to talk about the future configuration of our business and society, as I hinted in the first drafted segments of the introduction that I [posted 2016-2017](portal/dirittodivoto-com-section/expo2015diaries-drafting)).

Actually, today completed the structure, and I am preparing the draft of each chapter.

Why the wait?

Because I have "few" ideas about "few" industries and how "few" business processes and organizational structures should be reshaped- all built on experience and massive collection and review of aggregated knowledge (extracted from books, readings, conferences, as well as from other people).

Nonetheless, I was working on a contract (see [my CV](cv)), and therefore did not want the evolution of ideas that I posted publicly under my name since 2007 (and before that in closed BBS or other online and offline "networking posts") to be mistaken for commentary on my current job, colleagues, customers, etc.

To paraphrase somebody else, working is the scourge of the independent analyst class.

Do I have a schedule for my book publishing activities? Well, read the previous phrase...

Nonetheless, I decided for both [my own new activity](http://change-robertolofaro.it) and in the future to simply split between my activities as author, and those as consultant.

Because it is easier to position a business if it does just one thing (however large its category, and however small its team)- while, in order to support that "positioning" for the long run, in reality you need a 360 degree view on your target market.

Consider that, whatever product or service you sell, it is just a cog in the lifecycle of your customers (people or companies), also if for you it is everything.

Therefore, if you are setting the direction for your own organization, or support who does, you need to understand where your products or services fit in that lifecycle- including the future one.

As for writing, I will anyway keep doing the same: I find nothing more annoying than books and articles whose authors assume that what they say that other said should be enough for their readers.

Because any quote is selective, and biased by the Weltanschauung of whoever selected it.

Back to the current books.

Episode 6 of [#QuPlan](quplan) will talk mainly about the most neglected phase of any activity: closing it- and, actually, preparing for closing it across the whole lifecycle of the activity.

As in [Aristotle's "Poetics"](http://www.robertolofaro.com/portal/), and even more in some Hollywood books on screenwriting referencing it, if you choose the end, then that helps your narrative across all the "script".

Back to Expo2015: in reality the point is quite simple, and was hinted by its full title "#Expo2015Diaries: the century of the commons".

Look around you: also if you don't use Google, Facebook, etc. you are anyway "embedded" within a network of shared resources.

And this also required thinking again about the role of "innovation" and "innovators"- and who is involved in those activities.

As you can imagine, it will take a while to complete that book- meanwhile, maybe you can have a look at ["The business side of BYOD: cultural and organizational impacts ISBN 978-1494844264"](books/business-books/86-3-the-business-side-of-byod-cultural-and-organizational-impacts-isbn-978-1494844264)

Because the key concept is the same: adopt a systemic view- read [this book](https://www.librarything.com/work/18267034/book/133521024) if you want something deeper that articles that keep rephrasing "systemic" but never give you a guideline toward that target.

For the time being, this post is already too long, so... stay tuned.
And, as usual, any suggestion is welcome.